eight minutes past 10 gary stevenson is
an economist who focuses on inequality
a former trader who retired from the
city as a multi-millionaire
aged 27 after correctly predicting that
the 2008 financial crash
would happen mr stevenson thank you for
joining the program tonight
thanks for having me tom who's going to
pay for all of this
well you said a very interesting thing
their introduction which was that uh
we're breaking all the rules this time
and uh i think that really
sums up quite well because what is
happening right now with
government borrowing is very very
different from what normally happens
with government borrowing
now normally when the government needs
money goes out and borrows from wealthy
investors
pension funds maybe foreign governments
this time that's not happening
all the money that the government has
borrowed to deal with the covert crisis
so far
has been borrowed from the bank of
england and the bank of england as you
know
is essentially a government institution
an independent one
it's another one the bank of england has
got this money by printing it
and that's what taking a bit of time to
think about here
you know this is little quantitative
easing right we're just we're just
printing the cash to keep the cash
coming
yeah exactly the bank of england but the
bank of england is printing money
just like it did after 2008 but this
time the amount of money the bank of
england is printing
is pretty much exactly the same as the
amount of money the government is
spending
which means essentially all of this
money is coming from
government printing now that puts us in
a very interesting situation
is as you say breaking all the rules
when you start funding with printed
money
it really raises the question do you pay
it back
yep because the government here is it's
printing the money
it's borrowing it from the bank of
england but the bank of england is
printing it
and in the past whenever we've seen
governments do this the money does not
get paid back
and interestingly the government the
money does not have to be paid back
because the money is being borrowed from
another branch of government
you don't have to pay any interest on it
and in all the time this has been done
in the past
we've been doing it for more than 10
years now many countries have
when it has come to maturity the central
banker said okay
have another 10 years and they've
continued to allow it to be extended so
you know
really what is a debt if you don't have
to pay any interest and you never have
to pay it back
so but the the yes it depends i guess
what proportion of the amount that we
are borrowing at nearly a billion quid a
day
is being done through the printing of
money by the bank of england because we
also
the country does borrow and it's a
question that a lot of people i think
ask perfectly legitimately when we talk
about government borrowing
who are they going to to borrow the
money from who do they ring up to say
okay can you put the money in my account
by thursday
you know the 258 billion quid that are
being borrowed
and it's normally as you say pension
funds and other nations and
but this time you say that's not
happening it's coming from a different
source and the source
yeah this time it's us yeah it's really
it matches really well the amount of
money the government's borrowing
in this crisis the amount of money it's
spending its deficit spending to help
deal with kobe
is almost exactly the same as the amount
of money that the central bank is
printing which in this case i think is
300 billion pounds
an enormous amount of money i think that
works out something like
5 000 pounds per person in the country
huge amount of money so it's being
printed
by the government what that means by the
central bank which is essentially part
of the government
what that means is it will not be paid
back yeah i used to work in financial
markets i still talk to people in
financial markets
everyone in financial markets knows that
money is not being paid back
really which raises the question why
don't governments do this all the time
so this is hang on a second so gary so
so you're saying that the people that
you're speaking to
the job that you you're now presumably
retired from at the age of 30. my god i
need to ask you about that in a minute
um but that all the the finance guys
down in the city they're all saying to
you gary this is never going to be paid
off
this is just not going to happen yeah
they stopped looking at government debt
what they look at now is government debt
minus the amount borrowed from the
central bank because nobody ever expects
that to be paid back
which which raises the question what is
going to happen yeah what are the
consequences of it yeah quite and i
think really the interesting question is
what does that mean because
like you say we're breaking all the
rules here we're doing huge amounts of
deficit spending funded by printed money
and we really need to ask
what i mean the question which people
are asking how do you pay back that's
the wrong question
the question is what are the
consequences of
printing such huge amounts of money to
fund a government deficit
that is the question we need to ask and
and what would be your answer
well you need to look at what happens to
the money you know the reason
governments don't normally do this is
because it leads to a huge increase in
the money supply
and that has effect on the economy so in
this crisis
what's happened is you know a lot of
ordinary people
have lost their income they lost their
jobs and they're losing money but if you
look at richer people
those people have often kept their
incomes and their spending has collapsed
so if you actually look at the amount of
money being saved by higher income
people and richer people
it's gone to the roof so richer people
are accumulating a lot of money in their
banking as a result of this policy
so when we talk about going back to
normal after kobe we're not going to be
going back to normal no we're going to
be going back to a normal
where the richest people in the country
have massive bank accounts
full of a lot of cash and gary to ask
what does that do and gary the the
the the difference too which i i'm sort
of still
trying to get my head around again being
an absolute dunce on this stuff
the difference between what you see in
the stock market and the stock market
prices did
i mean in in america the the the price
is there the stock market there it's
like nothing happened i mean it's just
carrying on
normal house prices you look at house
prices we're expecting someone was
saying the banks were predicting an 18
drop in house prices they're carrying on
just chugging along ticking over
that the asset economy seems to be
carrying on as normal the real economy
bricks and mortar shops on the high
street people's jobs
is falling apart why is that yeah oh
that's
that is exactly right and it's exactly
because of what we just said here the
government has printed huge amounts of
money
and that has ended up in the bank
accounts of wealthier people
now you know i come from an ordinary
background but i work with a lot of
wealthy people from the uk from the us
if you give wealthy people a lot of
money they're going to invest it
yeah and in the u.s they're often in
stocks and shares in this country
that means yeah you can go back and look
at my right at the beginning of the
crisis a lot of people are predicting a
fall
i was predicting a riot and i was buying
everything because if you give rich
people a load of money
they will buy things if you look at 2008
everybody thought prices would crash but
in the end
london house prices doubled and that was
because of huge amounts of money
printing going to richer people
that will happen again here that is the
real cost let me talk about who's going
to pay for the crisis
what happens if london house prices
double again what happens though gary
gary it's so interesting the house price
thing is really interesting what happens
if there is an inflationary shock if
inflation is at 0.5
it's gone up but it's still only at 0.5
if you just print money
you get to some examples like you know
everyone knows the pictures of the
wheelbarrows of cash being run around
europe in the 1930s
so if there's an inflationary shock
we're screwed
with this amount of cash flying whether
your screw does not depend who you are
if you're one of the people who's
sitting with a bank account for the cash
now which a lot of the richer people in
this country are
then that's just fine for you my worry
is what happens to the ordinary people
when prices go up what happens to
ordinary people if house prices double
you know it's hard enough for
yeah some ordinary families to get
houses in this city right
if they double again you're telling like
you're selling half 67 of the kids
you're never going to get half so really
if you're talking about how do we deal
with this crisis
who's going to pay it back it's going to
be the poorer kids because the richer
guys
those guys are loaded they're making a
fortune on this
so really it's a problem of inequality
and distribution that that is the
problem
so actually the way in which you pay
this back as you say it's the wrong
question that's being asked because it's
not the
the debt that would you we're borrowing
to fund the covered response
we're never going to pay that back
that's that's fine we'll write that off
what needs to happen is the payback to
deal with the inequality that is about
to come
because as you say all the rich people
sit there getting richer buying their
houses
you know trading off property property
guys and the the poorer people whose
real economy has been decimated by this
they're left with nothing because they
don't have any assets exactly
exactly that is that that is a big
question the media is asking how do you
pay the debt back
that's the wrong question everybody in
finance knows the debt doesn't get paid
back the real question is what's going
to happen to the money
that's going to reach people it's going
to push asset prices up it is going to
cause a crisis in home affordability and
inequality
so really the problem we're going to
have coming out of this is how do we
deal
with that massive rising inequality and
the impossibility of getting housing for
ordinary people
and just a word on because i'm getting
lots of people texting and saying
inflation inflation inflation
how do you keep inflation low enough so
that you don't
don't have barrels or thousands of cash
being wheeled around there's two
different kinds of inflation which is
inflation out on the streets
and inflation in asset prices after 2008
we didn't see much inflation in shops
we didn't see but we saw a huge amount
of inflation eventually in assets so the
thing that's happening here is loads and
loads of people are losing their jobs
talk
and when people lose their jobs that
makes the job market really really weak
and people don't get pay rises
as long as pay rises aren't happening
then you don't get much inflation
so that's the reason why after 2008 we
didn't see inflation now i'm not saying
necessarily that's going to happen again
the amount of money being printed here
it's well it's much quicker definitely
than it was in 2008
there is a risk that we lose control of
it and inflation does increase
especially once covered passes and like
we've said all of these people with huge
amounts of cash in their bank
start trying to spend it that is
definitely a possibility
um i think if you remember after 2008
2010 2011 we did have quite high
inflation five percent yeah coming up to
six percent that's right and then
the bank of england rather sensibly i
suspect
decided to leave the money out there not
take any money back
leave the easy money the bank of england
if it happens you know if it's five six
percent which
you know i don't want to make any exact
predictions but it could be at some
point coming out of this
i think the bank will allow it to
continue but what that will cause
is a cost of living crisis for ordinary
people just like it did after 2008.
um gary you you've been fascinating
talking to you i'm already incredibly
late for the
the bits i need to hit on the program
i've got to ask you
what's it like to be 27 with multiple
millions in the bank account
um well um it's it's unusual
like i said i didn't grow up um you know
i don't know your money
and and i made the money very quickly
and it was it was all so it all come
very quickly to me and okay well let me
ask you this it's very funny you're
gonna have to be really brief gary i am
obsessed with i'm obsessed with this
this idea right so there you are it
doesn't matter what age you are who you
are
there is a moment in your life where you
suddenly realize you've got more money
than you ever possibly could have dreamt
of
that it's there for you and your whole
world has just
shifted on its access access because
you've you've got this money in your
bank account
and it's for you when was that moment
for you
for me when was that well that was when
i got my first bonus and i realized i
should have spent my whole childhood
buying boots meal deals um
yeah that was it but before i go i'd
just like to suggest them if anyone
wants to know more about the effects for
money printing there is a really good
video on my youtube gary's economics
explaining exactly how it works
great man gary stevenson thank you for
your time an economist focusing on
inequality former trader retired from
the city multimillionaire
aged 27.03